Felt resistance to touch insofar as it is the presentation of an object external to the perceivers body is a sympathetic response to the force that resists the perceptual activity, in the present case grasping, a kind of haptic touch.

The grasping hand assimilates to the object grasped because the forces that determine the object's shape, rigidity, and solidity are sufficient to maintain that shape within the hands grasp. It is these self maintaining forces that resist the subject's perceptual activity, grasping, that explains why the grasping hand assimilates to the object grasped. The hand extends its activity, it tightens its grasp, until it can no more because of a countervailing force sufficient to resist its encroachment.

For some kinds of intentional activity, awareness of the activity is guaranteed by your intentionally performing it, by your being the author of it, and hence is a kind of non observational awareness. I can be aware of my fingers drumming by my intentionally drumming my fingers. Similarly I can be aware of tightening my grasp by intentionally tightening my grasp. How can this fact, if it is one, about the non observational awareness of activity be leveraged in an explanation of how the experience of an impediment to that activity can constitute an awareness of an external body. It is when the impediment to perceptual activity is sympathetically responded to as a countervailing force, as the hand's force encountering an alien force resisting it, one force in conflict with another like it yet distinct from it, that the self maintaining forces of the body disclose the body's presence to tactile awareness.


"The primitive form of physical experience is emotional---blind emotion---received as felt elsewhere in another occasion and conformally appropriated as a subjective passion. In the language appropriate to the higher stages of experience, the primitive element is sympathy, that is, feeling the feeling in another and feeling conformally with another."

1. On any plausible non-skeptical perceptual epistemology, the phenomenology of perception, or at least some aspect of it, must be epistemically significant. What's wrong with Pryor's explanation and what may be right about it on a more literal and perhaps more crude construal.

2. If the phenomenology of perception is determined, at least in part, by the presentation of the object of perception to the perceiver's partial perspective, then the epistemic significance of phenomenology can be explained in terms of the epistemic significance of perceptual presentation. Perception is a mode of awareness of aspects of the natural environment upon which the truth of a range of judgments depends.

3. But what is it about sensory presentation that discloses a world without the perceiver's body? How is sensory presentation of external particulars so much as possible? The question underscores the need to give an account of sensory presentation, though not a reductive one, that will vindicate its role as a mode of awareness of particulars without the body. Analytic metaphysics currently lacks the resources to provide such an account. So where to begin?

4. The analogy of grasping. Tactile awareness as a model of perceptual awareness more generally.

5. Explaining presentation in tactile awareness as a mode of sympathy