I can start by saying that I have no reservation in recommending Kalderon’s book for publication. It is philosophy of the highest quality, it is original, it makes a distinctive contribution to the literature on perception, and it is a treat to read.

Kalderon’s aim in this work is to offer insights into the nature of sensory presentation. If one holds, as Kalderon does, that perception has an irreducible presentational element (a presentational element that is, for instance, not reducible to any intentional or representational content that it may have), then it is not obvious how to proceed when it comes to the constructive task of offering a positive theoretical account of sensory presentation. For a constraint on any such constructive task is the need to be consistent with the negative claim that the relevant presentational relation is irreducible. Kalderon’s approach, in meeting this challenge, is to proceed dialectically by taking puzzles about the nature of sensory presentation as a guide to uncovering its nature. In this work, the central puzzle, or question, that provides the inroad to this dialectical procedure is the following. What, if anything, makes apt tactile metaphors for sensory presentation? In particular, “why is grasping an apt metaphor for perceptual awareness, even for non-tactile modes of awareness such as vision an audition?” Noting that “tactile metaphors for perception are primordial and persistent”, Kalderon explores and uncovers ways in which such tactile metaphors are apt, and in doing so he draws out significant claims about the nature of sensory presentation, and the respects in which the conception of perception he leads us to is “anti-modern”. It is anti-modern both in its conception of our perceptual relation to the world, and also in the status it thereby grants to the “manifest image” of nature that we are perceptually related to.

The first chapter of the book is concerned with the phenomenology of haptic perception. The aim in this chapter is to uncover and make explicit how haptic perception “presents itself from within haptic experience”, in the hope that this will then help throw some light on what makes tactile metaphors, and in particular the metaphor of grasping, apt for perception generally. This phenomenological investigation leads Kalderon to make various proposals about the metaphysics of haptic perception: the presentation of tangible qualities in haptic exploration has duration, haptic perception “formally assimilates” to the tangible qualities presented to the perceiver’s haptic perspective, such assimilation is a consequence of haptic experience being constitutively shaped by the object presented to the perceiver’s haptic perspective, and the disclosure of tangible qualities in haptic perception is due, in part, to the activity of the hand in grasping and the resistance it encounters.

The book goes on to investigate, and make proposals about, the roles played by “activity” and “resistance” in disclosing objects of perception and their features in other modalities – namely audition and vision. It is suggested that in each case, such disclosure involves modes of assimilation as a consequence of perceptual experience being constitutively shaped the object being presented to the perceiver’s perspective. Moreover, Kalderon argues that what we find in each case is a form of “sympathetic” disclosure. The notion of “sympathetic” presentation is introduced in the second chapter, where it is deployed to address a puzzle about a haptic perception: How can “felt resistance to the hand’s activity disclose the presence and tangible qualities of an external body when not all limitations to the body’s activity are due to external bodies?” 

In the final chapter of the book, Kalderon argues that the form of sympathetic disclosure that he has articulated accommodates a strong form of perceptual realism – “a form of realism on which the distinction between the phenomenal and the noumenal collapses”, and according to which sensory experience discloses how things are in themselves, at least partially and imperfectly

The book contains many original and striking ideas – e.g. the role played in sensory presentation by “sympathetic disclosure”, the novel account of sounds and auditory perception offered in chapters 3 and 4, the use made of the notion of visual resistance and its role in looking in chapter 5. These novel ideas are not mere flights of fancy. They are grounded in, and informed by, the unusual breadth of historical resources that Kalderon draws on. (Discussed in the book are ideas and arguments from, among others, Aristotle, Bergson, Plotinus, Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, Olivi, Broad, Sartre, and Duns Scotus.)  Kalderon’s methodology, which he describes as “an unabashed exercise in historically informed, speculative metaphysics”, is distinctive, but it is also considered. In the Preface of the book he explains clearly his reasons for his approach, and that approach is more than justified by what we are subsequently offered. Also notable is the fact that in this book the discussion of vision comes last. Vision is usually accorded pre-eminence in general discussions of perception – other modes of perception being mentioned as an afterthought, if at all. Whereas Kalderon starts with a discussion of haptic perception (an important and fascinating topic which has received relatively attention in the philosophical literature). He then discusses sounds and auditory perception, over two chapters, before coming to vison. In short, this is quite unlike any other book on perception that I’ve seen in recent years, and the respects in which it is distinctive, to my mind, make it all the more appealing.  

I was asked to comment on whether I have any suggestions for expansion of the work. Although the manuscript may be relatively short, I think it contains more than much longer books, and I don’t see the need for any additional chapters. But my specific comments below indicate where I think further signposting may be useful (e.g. in chapter 3) and where I would have been interested to see certain ideas further addressed and elaborated (e.g. I would be interested to hear more from Kalderon on the potential differences between, and relation between, the tactile metaphors of contact and grasping). In my view the work is publishable in its current form, but I have included some specific comments below, by chapter, in case they are of use to the author.



Chapter 1

p. 11: “Not only do we speak of recognizing an object that we see as grasping the object present in our perceptual experience, but the presentation in experience is itself a kind of grasping. Perception puts us in contact with its object.” 
I think it is not obvious that the notions of ‘contact’ and ‘grasping’ are equivalent. The latter is active, the former isn’t, or needn’t be. Perhaps grasping requires contact and there can be contact without grasping. Perhaps perceptually attending is the analogue of grasping, and perceiving is the analogue of contact. It might be said that one can only perceptually attend to things with which one has perceptual contact, and aspects of perceptual attention may include maintaining contact, and exploring that with which one has contact, and perceiving better what it is that one has perceptual contact with. This is relevant to understanding the suggestion that grasping “presents itself as an exemplar of sensory presentation more generally” (p. 12), and “Grasping may be an apt metaphor for perception generally” (p. 13). What would be wrong in saying that contact, rather than grasping, is the exemplar of sensory presentation more generally? I would be interested to see further discussion of the potential differences between, and relation between, the tactile metaphors of contact and grasping early on in the book.

A further thought on the respect in which contact can be a passive affair. On p. 17 it is suggested that, “Maintaining simultaneous contact with the overall surface of a rigid body, or some non-insignificant portion of it, is a state sustained by activity. In this regard, it is like Ryle’s (1949, 149) example of keeping the enemy at bay, or Kripke’s (1972) example of the connection between heat and molecular motion. The state thus obtains for the duration of the sustaining activity”. One might also add that the state of contact can be suffered, against one’s will, and maintained because one is being acted upon. 

Chapter 2:

Section 2.2 discusses Fulkerson’s distinction between implicit and explicit experience, and questions whether the presentation of an object’s overall shape and volume in haptic experience merely depends upon an implicit experience of the hand’s configuration and force. When exploring how to understand the distinction between implicit and explicit experience, at one point reference is made to Campbell’s suggestion (which draws on Huang and Pashler 2007) that a property may be used to select an object in visual attention but not be accessed in consciously attending to it. The following worry is then raised for the application of Fulkerson’s distinction to the case of haptic experience: “There is a sense in which, for Fulkerson (2014, 91), implicit experiences are no experiences at all. The content of an implicit experience is merely the content of a potential, that is to say, non-actual, experience (Fulkerson, 2014, 95). And there is an associated tendency in Fulkerson’s discussion to identify conscious experience with what is attended to and accessed, with explicit experience. But if the presence of a tangible quality is the basis for the selection of an object or region in haptic exploration, and if selection is what makes the object or region tangible in the first place, then surely it contributes to the phenomenological character of the haptic experience even if it is not consciously attended to” (p. 44). My understanding of Campbell’s proposal that a property may be used to select an object in visual attention but not be accessed in consciously attending to it, is that the property in question can contribute to the phenomenology of the visual experience, despite not being accessed. (He suggests that the following may be an example: a subject may be able to pass the tests for colour vision in which all that separates a figure from its background is the hue, and yet that subject may be unable to access the colour property in visual attention). So perhaps it could be made clearer here that Campbell’s own proposal is not subject to the sort of complaint made against Fulkerson. 

Section 2.3 argues against ‘Haptic Indirect Realism’. This is the proposal that we are “immediately presented with the hand’s configuration and force and thereby mediately presented with the overall shape and volume of the object grasped” (p. 46). The following objection is raised: “That haptic perception depends only upon an implicit awareness of the hand’s configuration and force reveals this otherwise natural suggestion to be ultimately misguided” (p. 46). I think one would need to know more about how the immediate/mediate distinction is being understood in order to assess the force of that objection. For example, one can imagine versions of sense-datum theories that hold that sense-data are the ‘immediate’ objects of perception (on one understanding of ‘immediate’), and that properties of these sense-data are used to ‘select’ objects of perceptual attention (in Campbell’s sense), while also holding that the objects we ‘access’ in perceptual attention are the mind-independent objects that we thereby ‘mediately’ perceive. It may be that in this context “immediate presentation” is equivalent to “explicit awareness”. But if that’s the case, I think it’s not clear what this section is adding to the previous reflections on the idea that there is a respect in which in haptic experience one is implicitly ware of the hand’s configuration and force.

Section 2.5 discusses, among other things, the idea that “it is this impediment of the will that makes the disclosure of the extrasomatic in haptic experience possible” (p. 57). At one point the following characterisation is given of a respect in which one is aware of the a limit to the hand’s activity in haptic experience: Such awareness affords the subject “with a contrast between the hand’s present configuration and a potential configuration that extends beyond the points at which the hand’s force is resisted by the self-maintaining forces of the object grasped.” That sounds right, but I was unsure of some of the further elaborations that were given of a respect in which felt resistance of the hand’s force involves an “impediment of the will”. For instance:  
Not only must one have a sense of how far one’s grasp may extend if unimpeded, but one must also have a sense of an impediment to one’s grasp. A sense of impediment arises out of a frustration of the will in being unable to extend one’s grasp further. (p. 55)

The location of the hand’s configuration in the space of potential motor activity is only experienced as a limit insofar as it is the frustration and not the fulfilment of the will. The frustration arises from the inability to extend the hand’s activity further in peripersonal space, the object of the will being located in the space beyond which the hand may extend its activity, and this despite a sense of effort exerted in trying to obtain the object of the will—the felt force, however implicit, of the hand’s activity in conflict with the self-maintaining forces of the object grasped. (p. 55)

Not only does felt resistance to touch involve a sense of how far one’s grasp may extend if unimpeded (and so locating the hand’s present configuration in a broader space of potential motor activity) but also the frustration of the will in being able to extend that grasp no further and this despite the effort exerted. (p. 57)

The appeal to “being unable to extend one’s grasp further” can give the impression that when grasping an object one’s will is directed at exerting as much force as it can muster in extending one’s grasp. Typically, I take it, that won’t be the case. The force exerted and maintained will vary depending on the nature of the object (e.g. its fragility, whether it is sponge-like, its weight etc) and what one wants to do with it (e.g. explore its contours, or texture, or pick it up, hold it, squash it etc.). So a more apt description of the way in which the will is directed in grasping an object seems to be something like the following: exerting and maintaining the appropriate degree of force with one’s hand, given one’s intentions with respect to the object, and given the self-maintaining forces of the object that resist the force exerted by the hand. And it’s not obvious that the exercise of that capacity is most appropriately described as “an impediment of the will”. (There will be resistance to the force of the hand that is exerted in grasping, but on the construal just given it’s not clear that this amounts to an impediment of the will).

Chapter 3

I thought that this chapter might benefit from further signposting, so the reader has a clearer sense, earlier on, of the direction of argument to be pursued over this and the subsequent chapter, and so she can more easily orient herself with respect to those proposals being endorsed, and those that are merely being considered. Including linking passages that introduce sections 3.4 and 3.5 might also help.

At one point it is suggested that “processes are no more wholly present at each moment of their occurrence than events” (p. 80). It wasn’t clear what view of process was being assumed here. On the view according to which processes are temporal analogues of the referents of mass terms, such as gold, one might say that at any moment of the occurrence of a process not all of the process is present. But this doesn’t entail that the process is not wholly present at that moment (at least on one understanding of that phrase). Compare here: at a particular spatial location not all of the gold is present. From this it doesn’t follow that gold is not wholly present at the spatial location. 

p. 80: “whereas haptic perception may disclose events, it discloses, as well, relatively static features such as texture and temperature. Sounds, by contrast, are essentially dynamic entities, not wholly present at any moment of their existence but unfolding in time”. Granting that sounds are events, one might nonetheless think that sounds have acoustic features, such as timbre, pitch and loudness, which are objects of audition, and which are not themselves events (or processes). And these acoustic features may be analogues of the relatively static properties disclosed in haptic perception. I take it that the audibility of such acoustic features potentially provides grounds to reject the proposal, discussed later, that audibilia “are essentially dynamic entities not wholly present at any given moment”. That proposal may be an overstatement if acoustic properties are among the audibilia, and acoustic properties are neither processes nor events.

p. 86: “Whereas on The Wave Theory, the existence of sound depends upon a medium in which the event transpires, on The Event View, sound is existentially independent of a medium. An event involving a material source may be sufficient to cause the propagation of a patterned disturbance through a dense and elastic medium and may yet occur in the absence of such a medium. The existential independence of sound from a medium on The Event View thus allows for sound in a vacuum in the way The Wave Theory could not (OCallaghan, 2007, 2009; on Berkeley’s argument from vacuums see Pasnau, 1999).” My understanding of O’Callaghan’s ‘Event View’ is that the events in question are medium-disturbing events, and so they are events that are not existentially independent of a medium. See for example O’Callaghan 2007, p. 91: “The view according to which sounds are particular events of objects or interacting bodies disturbing a surrounding medium in a wavelike manner recognizes the distal locations of sounds while preserving the important truth in the wave conception that no sounds exist in vacuums. The event view thus avoids both horns of the dilemma over locating sounds in the sources or locating them in the medium”.

On p. 92 it is suggested that “sometimes at least, events and processes can change their location. The fight erupted in the bar and spilled out into the street. The conga line began in the dining room and wound its way into the living room.” Just an observation – it is not obvious that events are subjects of change, unless such talk simply amounts to the idea that different temporal parts of the event have different features. (The same might be said of processes, although some – e.g. Stout and Steward – would disagree).

Chapter 4

p.101: “We do not hear sources by hearing their sounds as the neo-Berkelean would have it. Rather we hear the sources of sound directly.” If O’Callaghan and Nudds are assumed to be neo-Berkeleans, then I suspect that they would object to the suggestion that on their views we do not hear the sources of sound directly. I can imagine both responding by noting that on their views the sources of sounds and the sounds produced are distinct existents, and we cannot hear sources without hearing the sounds they produce, but  both sources and sounds feature in the content of auditory experience, and so both the sources of sounds, as well as sounds, are perceived ‘directly’. Moreover, it’s not obvious that their different accounts of the perceived relations between sounds and their sources commit them to the idea that sources of sound are perceived ‘indirectly’. (E.g. consider O’Callaghan’s (2011) suggestion that sounds are audibly related mereologically to their sources.) Perhaps O’Callaghan and Nudds are not assumed to be among the neo-Berkeleans. But if that’s the case, then it might be helpful to make that clearer. (It’s not obvious where to locate Nudds and O’Callaghan on the continuum, as neither of them are clearly Heiderggerians.)

On p. 105 the commitments of the neo-Berkelean are expressed in the following way: “According to the neo-Berkelean, sounds are the immediate objects of audition in something like the following sense. Sounds are audible. Moreover, sounds are audible in themselves. Sounds are audible in themselves in the sense that they contain within themselves the power of their own audibility. So one can hear a sound without hearing any other thing. In hearing a sound, auditory experience affords the perceiver with explicit awareness of that sound independently of hearing any other thing.”  It is then argued that Nudds’ claims about the function of auditory perception makes problems for this neo-Berkelean view. In particular, Nudds’ claim that “in hearing a sound in a complex sonic environment with multiple active sources of sound, the sound the perceiver hears is segmented from all that they hear due, in part, to their auditory system identifying its source”. I think that Nudds’ claim at most gets us the conclusion that typically, when we hear ecological sounds, we won’t hear a sound without hearing its source. But that doesn’t establish the stronger claim that one cannot hear a sound without hearing any other thing. The perception of artificial sounds (including recorded sound) might be thought to be examples of cases in which we hear a sound without hearing its source. It is not obvious that in such cases we really do hear the source that is generating the artificial sound that we hear. (E.g. If you are listening to a recording of a train without realising that it is a recording, you might take yourself to hear a train. But the train is not the source of the sound you are now listening to - the sound you are now listening to is an event distinct from the event that was recorded. And it’s not clear that you can hear and identify the source of the sound – the artificial sound – you are now listening to). Artificial sounds are not discussed in the book, but one might think that the suggested comparison between sound and illumination invites certain parallels. (i.e. the suggestion that “Just as illumination makes the visible perceptually accessible, sound makes the activities of distal bodies perceptually accessible.”). It is noted that “One sees through, or in, illuminated media, such as air or water, and thereby perceives the colors of distal bodies arrayed in the natural environment. One hears through, or in, audible media, the sound, and thereby perceives the activities of distal bodies arrayed in the natural environment” (p. 108). As well as seeing the colours of distal object through illuminated media, one can also perceive coloured sources of illumination, their halos, beams of light, and light objects (e.g. holograms). In keeping with the sentiment of the “pluralism of the sensible”, one might think that there are instances of auditory perception that are akin to the perception of light objects, in which one perceives sounds (‘artificial’ sounds) without perceiving their sources.

(As an aside, rather than claiming that one cannot hear a sound without hearing any other thing, one might instead claim that when one hears both a sound and its source, one cannot attend to just the sound i.e. without attending to the source. That claim, if true, might problems for versions of a neo-Berkelean view. But it’s not clear that Nudds’ claims about the workings of the auditory system in themselves suffice to establish that particular claim about auditory attention.) 

In the discussion of listening, the focus is on listening out for. But one might think that one can listen to, as well as listen out for, and there may be features of the activity of listening to that merit mention. Listening to, in contrast with listening out for, is suggestive of the activity of maintaining perceptual contact with something. Perhaps this makes it more analogous to grasping than listening out for. Moreover, one might think that one can listen to the individuals that engage in sound generating activity. So in that respect a case can potentially be made for thinking that the bodies that engage in sound generating activity, and not just the sound generating activities they engage in, are among the objects of auditory attention.

Chapter 5

p. 136: “I turn, and look, and see an ancient chestnut tree. In so doing, I direct my gaze across the park. I look through the illuminated space, a space perceptually penetrated by my gaze, until I can no more. It is the resistance to my looking, my visual encounter with the perceptually impenetrable, that presents opaque objects arrayed in the distal environment. The ancient chestnut tree resists my visual activity.” Isn’t a perceptually impenetrable entity resistant to one’s visual activity only if the aim of that visual activity is to see through? If the aim of the visual activity is looking at, then in what respect is “resistance of visual activity” an appropriate description? It seems odd to think that looking at is to be understood in terms of resistance to the visual activity of looking through. (This may not be unrelated to the earlier comment about grasping – i.e. the suggestion that, typically, when grasping an object one’s will is not directed at exerting as much force as it can muster in extending one’s grasp.) It could be that I have just misunderstood the notion of “visual resistance” as it is being used here.  But the thought is just that visual impenetrability may, and perhaps standardly will, afford opportunities for visual activity without its being the case that perceptual impenetrability in any way resists that visual activity, unless the visual activity in question is looking through. By analogy, the solidity of objects affords opportunities for haptic activity without its being the case that solidity in any way resists that haptic activity, unless the aim of that haptic activity is to squash the object question. I sometimes came away with the impression that something like the following suggestion was, at least implicitly, being made: activity aimed at seeing through is somehow central to our understanding of visual activity in general, and activity aimed at squashing an object is central to our understanding of haptic activity in general. Is that part of what is being proposed?

Chapter 6

p. 151: “There is a way in which the present account, where sensory presentation is governed by the principle of sympathy, can make sense of this neo-Platonic heritage, though perhaps it is not the only way. On the understanding of this neo-Platonic heritage afforded by sympathy, perception presents how things are from within. Sympathy makes possible the presentation of a thing’s inner nature, and thus one may perceive how a thing is in itself.” In this context, does ‘inner nature’ just mean some of the intrinsic properties of the thing?

For what it’s worth (and this may be unhelpful), my hunch is that the question of whether our partial perceptual perspective on perceived items results in our failure to access things-in-themselves, may turn on the account that is to be given of the spatio-temporal perspective of perception (rather than simply resting on the idea that we can have knowledge of an object only in so far as it affects us). For example, relevant here may be the question of whether the phenomenology of temporal presence is to be accounted for in terms of a partial perspective on time as it is in itself, and if not whether there is something like a temporal form of intuition that structures all appearances, and prevents us from knowing things in themselves. (The claim that space and time are merely forms of intuition seems to me to be central to Kant’s reasons for denying that we can have knowledge of the noumenal, and this doesn’t appear to be captured by simple appeal to the idea that we can have knowledge of an object only in so far as it affects us.)









