Report on Kalderon, ParousiaThis is an impressively wide-ranging, and very learned, treatise on perception, ranging over touch, hearing, and sound. It draws extensively on the whole history of perception, from antiquity into the Middle Ages, onward to Kant and Bergson and more. At the same time, it also makes bold systematic claims of a sort that interact with both the continental and the analytic traditions. If all this could be pulled off successfully, it would be quite an achievement. I do not, however, think that the project is at all successful.I approached this book initially with a great deal of enthusiasm, but I quickly became dismayed by the loose argumentation and general obscurity regarding even the principal theses of the book. Given my own interests, I ought to have something like an ideal reader, but instead I found myself immensely frustrated. To illustrate my concerns, it’s probably best to move directly into my specific concerns.Title: Astonishingly, a search of the pdf file for the string ‘parousia’ turns up exactly one occurrence of this obscure word – in the title! This seems to me symptomatic of the general lack of explanation of what the book is trying to do.Chapter 1. This is a very interesting, and impressively wide-ranging, discussion of tactile perception, but it’s very hard to know what to make of all this material, because we haven’t yet been given enough of a sense of how the argument of the book is going to go.  We don’t know exactly how tactile perception is going to be exemplary for the other senses – “an apt metaphor” (22) – or what element of the premodern analysis is going to be important, or what sort of metaphysics is going to emerge.  Without knowing those things, it’s very hard to know how to take all of this.pp. 16-17 is an example of the difficulties here. It’s interesting to register the way in which the tactile case looks to support a premodern commitment to formal assimilation, but what’s going to follow from this? Is this going to be the foundation of a broader argument for formal assimilation? If so, the reader should know that now.p. 21. “If the phenomenological character of perception is constitutively shaped by the object presented to the perceiver’s partial perspective, then we can begin to see the epistemic significance of perceptual phenomenology”Are we now starting to draw large conclusions from the tactile case? It’s not clear. Of course, the claim is made conditionally, suggesting that we’re only at the first stage of a longer argument in which the antecedent will be discharged. But again it’s hard to know what to make of a claim such as this without a clearer sense of what “shaping” is going to amount to, outside the tactile case. I realize the book can’t do everything all at once. But it’s frustrating to begin with the tactile in this way, because it’s very hard to see how that case is going to generalize.p. 22. “the formal assimilation of the haptic experience, that the hand’s activity gives rise to, to the object presented in it.”This is an interesting remark. It’s easy to be lured into supposing that the tactile case involves shaping just because the hand molds itself, and the author has himself encouraged this way of thinking about the case. So it’s important to recognize that if this is going to be a tactile case in the proper sense, then what’s at issue is the tactile sensation. (It’s not as if one looks down and sees the shape of the hand, and then infers that the cup has a similar shape!) But once one focuses on the tactile sensation, it becomes far less clear that there’s shaping going on at all. And though the author himself is registering this point here, I’m not sure it’s been made clearly enough so far. And I’m worried that I’ve lost a grip (so to speak!) on what shaping actually is, in the broader sense that’s now been identified.p. 24. striking the skull with “the same force,” using feather and bone. Since F = ma, ‘force’ isn’t the right word here.p. 24. It’s tempting to think that the story here is that the soul wraps itself (as it were) around the corporeal, and thus takes on an image. But this can’t be quite right, or at any rate it’s misleading, since such wrapping would seem to require the soul’s being acted on – shaped/molded – by the body. So care has to be taken to avoid a picture on which the soul seizes the corporeal impression just as the hand seizes a physical object.  p. 25 speaks of “actively molding itself,” perhaps to avoid the suggestion that the hand/soul is passively shaped, but I wonder how this would actually work. To mold itself actively, would the hand have to know in advance what shape it is supposed to assume? I don’t think that’s the model we want. But what, then, does active molding amount to?p. 26. I find the “puzzle” here quite stimulating, but I’d like – once again – to have a sense of its place in the larger whole. Is this one of the animating questions of the whole book? Does the author think that we can answer this question in the tactile case and thereby make progress on answering it for perception more generally? The material presented throughout this chapter would be much more effective if more of the big picture had been unfolded already.2.1 title. I don’t understand the sense in which what’s being discussed here counts as metaphysics.p. 35. The author takes for granted a distinction drawn from Fulkerson between implicit and explicit experiences. But I find this rather dubious. Implicit experiences are supposed to be experiences, but “unattended” and in some sense not “conscious” but yet still “in consciousness.” These are Fulkerson’s claims, but I’m far from clear on what it amounts to. If we’re allowed to rely on this distinction, then it’s straightforward to avoid indirect realism, but I think that taking the distinction for granted is a kind of cheat.  As the author goes on to say, perhaps with something like my concern in mind, this sort of move “is less an explanation than what needs explaining” (p. 36). But I don’t feel as if the pages that follow go much farther. The author uses Fulkerson’s expression “open for epistemic appraisal.” But it’s not clear to me that hand-experiences are not open in this way.Moreover, as the discussion continues, the author himself raises doubts about Fulkerson’s distinction, and seems to shift away from it, toward a conception of foreground and background, something that comes in degrees (p. 38). But then where are things left? I find it quite unclear. And when the following section (2.3) begins, it looks as if we’re back to Fulkerson’s notion of implicit vs. explicit, as the basis on which indirect realism will be rejected.p. 42. “Sympathy is what makes the extrasomatic present in haptic experience.” This is a dramatic claim, but at this point ‘sympathy’ just looks like a word being used to mark the sort of outward directed experience that the author is interested in. We don’t yet have anything like an explanation – just a word. And going on to invoke Stoic physics does not help. Of course, the author is going to have much more to say. But the discussion doesn’t do a good job acknowledging just how obscure and unhelpful the proposal originally seems.p. 44. Frege. I don’t see how this material helps – it just seems to be introducing further complications, without clarifying anything. The same seems true of the subject-object discussion that follows, and the cast of characters running from Plotinus to Johnston. It’s just entirely unclear how this is helping us get clear on sympathy.p. 46. “presupposing the unity of haptic presentation”  - Here I’m just confused. Such unity, if I’m tracking this, is a unity of subject and object. But wasn’t the whole point of the previous material from Fulkerson etc. to insist on such a distinction, and somehow to background the subject? What happened to that project?p. 47. Derrida. I’d be glad to have an explanation of what’s going on with Derrida’s contradictory claims here (the “aporia”), but we’re never given this, making it unclear what the point of introducing Derrida is at all. pp. 52 ff. The historical discussion that follows here is interesting in its own right, but it does not strike me as doing anything to help explain how sympathy plays a role in tactile perception – esp. since the paradigmatic cases of sympathy under discussion here are at a distance. It’s very difficult for the reader to shift gears at this point and take in this historical material just for its own sake. But if the material is meant to be more than of mere historical interest, it’s utterly unclear how it’s supposed to help.	I see that pp. 62 ff tries to do some of this work. And here I can see how the similarities and dissimilarities are supposed to run. But although I can see how the story is supposed to go, I can’t see what we’ve gained from the effort. I just don’t see any insights here to be gathered from this historical material.pp. 62-63. Here’s a paragraph (beginning “We saw in our discussion…”) where things are apparently meant to be pulled together. But though I can recognize various elements from the preceding discussions, I just don’t find the remarks here illuminating. Perhaps I’m the wrong reader for this book.p. 66. “not explicit” …. So now we’re back to the Fulkerson distinction?  “experienced as a sympathetic response” … So the inner-experience is experienced, but experienced in a certain way? But what of the unity thesis? Perhaps a constructive remark I can make at this point is that I’m unclear on how the sympathy-experience relates to the implicitness of the inner experience or to the backgrounding of the inner-experience. These two ways of going strike me as being in tension rather than complementary.  Adding to the mix is the claim lower down on the page about the inner experience as “the way in which  the overall shape and volume of the stone is presented in that experience.” This seems to get us into the domain of qualia and phenomenal vs. representational theories of perceptual content. But surely the author doesn’t want to go there.Perhaps part of the problem is what comes next: “haptic presentation is an irreducible unity.” So perhaps it was a mistake right at the start to distinguish inner from outer, and try to foreground and background the different components. Perhaps there are no components? I just don’t feel as if the author is in control of all this material. And it doesn’t help to be told that the kind of unity at issue here is revealed by its “intelligible structure.” An irreducible unity that yet has intelligible structure??p. 71 “in order to hear something, one must listen.” So crudely put, this can’t be right. Noises capture our attention all the time, even when we’re not listening. They even wake us up at night. De Biran puts things more plausibly, though his formulation feels rather platitudinous.pp. 71 ff. The chapter plunges into a discussion of various issues regarding sound without giving the reader a clear account of how this is going to build into something relevant to the larger claims of the book. It would be good to be given a clearer road map. This becomes increasingly problematic as the chapter progresses, because although the author has an impressive grasp of a wide range of issues regarding sound, it’s not at all clear what the point of the whole discussion is. The author’s position does not seem to be original, within the context of the literature on sound, and so presumably the point is to contribute to the larger project of the book. But we aren’t told, at any point in the chapter, how that story goes, which is quite frustrating.pp. 82-83. the wave theory explains “ordinary practices of identifying and re-identifying sound.” This strikes me as, if anything, going against the wave theory. For, as the author immediately says, we ordinarily take different perceivers at different locations to hear the same sound. But how does that fit with the wave theory? Are both hearing the entirety of the waves that emanate from the object? That seems like a weird thing to say. What seems more natural is to say that they’re both hearing the event at the source (the vibration, etc.) At any rate, more needs to be said here about how the wave theory is to be understood, in terms of its furnishing an object of auditory perception.p. 83. If sound were identified with a patterned disturbance, then since the patterned disturbance differed in the auditory stimulation of the two perceivers, they would be hearing different sounds.Isn’t this just a version of the argument from illusion? Indeed, couldn’t an argument of just this form be easily made to show that vision does not perceive the colors of objects, but instead the emanating light rays? The argument here seems obviously too quick and facile.pp. 87 ff. The “brief digression” here strikes me as quite interesting and worthy of development as an independent article. Here the author does seem to be developing new ideas about these topics. It’s not likely to get any attention, however, as a digression within a book.p. 89 etc. “sounds being heard to fill the air.” It might be helpful to think about the author’s arguments as they would apply (or not) to the case of vision. Would it be plausible to make such arguments to show that colors are seen to fill the air? I don’t mean this as an unfriendly suggestion, because I’m supposing the author will be able to distinguish the two cases. But such distinguishing had better be possible, I think, because it won’t seem very plausible to make the analogous claim in the visual case.p. 91. I wish the discussion here of the motion of a sound were clearer, esp. since it seems closely connected to above worries about how the wave view furnishes an object of audition. I take it that the long passage from Pritchard is meant to make the point, in part, that a compression wave does not involve anything’s being transmitted along the wave, from start to end. It’s just particles knocking against each other. The particles are moving, but only within a limited bandwidth, and nothing passes from wave to wave to wave. But once that scientific point’s been made clearly, someone might then wonder whether, from a more philosophical point of view, it might be defensible to say that nevertheless something does move across the waves – viz., the sound travels. Indeed, one might think that this is what the wave theory must say. And if one wants to talk that way, then there’s some metaphysical work that needs to be done to explain what such a sound is, since it’s evidently not something accounted for in the straightforward scientific account of how compression waves work.	The author instead opts for growth. But isn’t growth a kind of motion? Another problem with this suggestion is that I suppose that on a view such as this the thing to say is that sounds travel across a space in such a way that they don’t remain where they started. For instance, the chime of Big Ben makes its way across London, so that first it is present in Westminster, makes its way to the City and out to East London, at which point it is no longer in Westminster. (Perhaps it would take a very quiet night for the sound to make it that far.) So this looks like movement, not growth, except insofar as one might say that the outer limit of the sphere is expanding. But it’s an expanding half-sphere, empty inside, rather than an expanding solid half-sphere of sound. Moreover, though such a wave is growing spatially, it’s diminishing in force. So it’s not clear to me how apt it is to speak of growth here at all. The ensuing discussion talks about these issues in a very sophisticated way, but would benefit from registering these complications.Ch. 4. This is the most sustained and focused piece of philosophical discussion in the book so far. As elsewhere, though, it’s not explained how it fits into the larger argument of the paper, which is a considerable liability. It’s also not clear in what way it constitutes an original contribution to the subject. It looks as if the author is quite closely following the view of Nudds. If there’s substantially new ideas here, the author should make clear what they are.As for the argument that lies at the heart of the chapter – that we hear sources because “hearing the sources of sound lends intelligibility to what is heard” (104) – it’s worth noting that this argument appears to be efficacious only against a wave theory of sound. And although that’s the author’s preferred view, it’s a minority view among people who work on sound. Most seem to think of sounds as properties or events at the source. But that view is quite compatible with the author’s argument here. Indeed, reflection on this situation makes the author’s view seem rather peculiar. He wants sounds to be waves, but then reflection on that position leads him to deny that sounds are the things heard. Well, isn’t that a good reason to reconsider the conclusion that sounds are waves?p. 104: “sounds are not audible in themselves.” One might take this to be a reductio of the author’s position, inasmuch as one might suppose that – whatever sounds are – they must be things that are audible in themselves.p. 105. “becoming invisible is not possible for us” – sure it is, just step out of the light. It’s not as if we’re phosphorescent! The omnipresence of windows, artificial lighting, etc., is simply a mark of our orientation toward visual perception. If we were like bats, we’d have sonar set up all about, making it analogously hard to become inaudible.p. 107. “it is sympathy” !!  Here finally we return to what is, presumably, the whole point of this extended discussion of sound. But I for one just have no idea how the notion of sympathy is meant to explain anything. Even at this stage of the book, it seems to me merely a metaphor that has not yet been articulated.	I can see the core appeal of the analogy between hearing and touch that’s being drawn on pp. 107-8, but I just don’t feel as if the analogy illuminates much at all. In the previous chapter, the author objected to the project of treating the objects of perception as all belonging to the same metaphysical category. But, given that scruple, why should we be at all attracted to the idea that there will be some kind of grasping relationship, to be understood in terms of sympathy, that explains both touch and hearing?pp. 110-11. Here, at the end of 4.4, we’re given some of the bigger picture that the author is after, including a glimpse of the metaphysics we’ve been promised. But it’s striking that there’s absolutely no argument being made for these large conclusions – they’re just baldly asserted. That would have been OK earlier in the book, but by this point one would hope for more.p. 112. “speculative anatomy” – and it’s false, yes? It would be good to say.pp. 114-15. Here the comparison between listening and grasping seems persuasive, but this seems like a much smaller point than the more ambitious claims that had been urged earlier. If this is all supposed to come together as a package, it’s hard for this reader to pull the threads together.p. 127. Olivi’s virtual presence as contrasted with Plotinus’ sympathy.  Why think they’re in opposition? I have so flimsy a grasp of either notion that, for all I can tell, they’re alternative labels for the very same idea.p. 127. Plotinus: “obviously it is there that the apprehension takes place.” This is quite an interesting remark. In the present context, I wonder how it fits with the author’s larger project. In the case of touch, perceiver and object might seem to come together, whereas in vision there’s a distance. So if there’s grasping in vision, where does it happen? At the object or at the eye? Or both? And notice that one might hesitate to think the relevant inner location is the eye, as opposed to farther inside. But as soon as one starts to doubt that, one might likewise doubt that the relevant inner location for touch is the hand. And in that case maybe there’s a distance even in touching.p. 128. I’m surprised to see the author interpret Plotinus as saying that “the perceptual act takes place in its object.” I guess I can see how this might be how the passage gets read, but it’s not how I was taking it. If I fix my car, where does the fixing happen? In the car, presumably, since it’s the thing that gets fixed. But at the same time the act of fixing is an action of my body. Similarly, the object of vision is the thing apprehended, and so one might take it to be “obvious” that the apprehension is there where the thing apprehended is, even though the act of apprehending is obviously an act of my sensory powers, located where they are. p. 128. “virtual presence is no presence at all.”  This requires an understanding of what virtual presence amounts to that I don’t feel as if we’ve been given. Nor do I see what’s “extreme” in Olivi’s view – I just don’t feel as if it’s been explained clearly enough to license such conclusions.p. 130. Even if Olivi is wrong to deny that an object plays a causal role in its perceptionEarlier the author remarked that Olivi rejects an extramission view. My impression is that he doesn’t embrace action at a distance either, and that he accepts some kind of intromission view which, as the author says, was standard at this time. But if so, then can it be right here to say that, for Olivi, the object plays no causal role? (Well, if this is the view, then at least it becomes clearer why the author thinks that Olivi’s view is extreme. But this highlights all the more the need to explain more clearly what the view is supposed to be – and, as usual, how it fits into the larger story of the book.)p. 131. The first ¶ of 5.4 seems to point toward what the author is after. I’m just grasping at straws here, but apparently the whole point of the Olivi discussion was to allow us to consider a figure who takes seriously the sort of outward-directed extension that the author thinks we need. So it would be hugely helpful if the author had plainly said from the start of the chapter that “here’s what we need to explain (outward looking) and here’s some theories that don’t give us that (literal extramission, and Olivi’s virtual attention), but now here’s a theory that does give us that (sympathy).”p. 133. the content of their perception is determined by what they encounterin so looking in a manner inconsistent with the object of perception being a mereterminative causeHere it would be helpful to engage more directly with the difference between Olivi and what the author is here proposing. Again, the character of Olivi’s view has not been made clear enough to make this criticism clear. Also, it would be helpful to have a clearer sense of how the story here fits with the earlier story about touch, since one might think in touch the notion of a terminative cause fits pretty well. Is it the business about how we touch and retouch an object that is critical here? It’s not clear.p. 136. Can sympathy be extended to the non-opaque? The question strikes me as somewhat absurd, because it suggests we’ve already been given an illuminating account of what sympathy amounts to in standard visual cases, and so we’re ready to clean up some of the tricky peripheral details. In fact we’ve been giving nothing even remotely approaching an account of how the story goes in paradigm cases.p. 139. Here, in the final full ¶ on the page, we have some substantive comments about how the author’s theory is supposed to go. But if I focus in on any particular claim, it’s hard to know what the author means. Consider this:In sympathetically disclosing the ancient chestnut tree, my visual experienceis constitutively shaped by that tree.Is such shaping (part of) what it is to engage in sympathetic perception? I’m supposing so, though the author hasn’t said so. But if so, then I want to know what ‘constitutively shaped’ means. How does the first word function, in its adverbial form? Is this a way of shaping? I can’t make sense of that. I would know what the passage means, if the author wants to say that the tree is a constituent of the experience. That would seem to mean that the tree is part of the experience. Is that the view? The next sentence seems to go in this direction:The conscious character of seeing the tree is constituted, in part, by its bright green burs and the wave-like form of its trunk sympathetically presented to my partial perspective on that tree in the given circumstances of perception.Perhaps this is meant to make more precise the previous sentence. It (perhaps) tells us that the “experience” is constituted insofar as its “conscious character” is constituted. That’s helpful, though it would be good to say what such character precisely is. In any case, what it’s constituted by are apparently various parts of the tree (such as its burs). Or is it not the burs but the color of the burs? And is it the trunk that partly constitutes the conscious character, or is it the “wave-like form” of the trunk? It’s a standard view among recent naïve realists to treat perceptual content (or perhaps phenomenal character) as partially constituted by the sensible qualities of things. Is that the view being offered here? The author slides around between integral parts, secondary qualities, and primary qualities as that which constitutes conscious character. Is the view really so ecumenical about such things, or is the author just being sloppy?	I could go on and on in this way, sentence by sentence….. I’m trying hard to make sense of the view, but there’s just not nearly enough to make it possible to arrive at a clear sense of what the author is trying to say.p. 146. St. Paul’s constitutively shapes London’s skyline. This helps with getting clear on what ‘constitutively’ amounts to, but it raises more questions than it answers when it comes to the case of perceptual content. And in what follows the author just speaks blandly of perceptual objects as constituents.p. 147. Constitutive shaping entails formal assimilation, though formal assimilation need not involve constitutive shapingAn interesting claim, but I don’t know where it’s been argued for. And I don’t follow the remainder of the ¶ at all. We’re given Locke, who denies the constituent claim for primary qualities – which I guess means the author rejects L’s view? Then we’re given Ardley, whoever he is – is his view also rejected, or is it embraced, and what does it have to do with Locke? And then we’re given Plotinus!p. 148. “the present metaphysics of perception.”  We were promised a metaphysics at the start of the book, and I guess we’ve now been given it. But it’s certainly not what I expected a metaphysics to be. The author doesn’t seem to have made any claims about the nature of mind-independent reality. So I’d say the label is misleading.p. 150. If perceptual presentation is sympathetic presentation, then perception placesus into the heart of things and allows us to experience them from withinFrom within? Surely something has gone wrong, if an analysis that begins with the tactile case ends up concluding that perception gets within things. Or is this just another metaphor? Lower down, we get the idea of “the presentation of a thing’s inner nature.” Does the author think that perception actually does reveal inner natures? If so, why is it so very difficult to grasp the natures of things? How would this story go in a familiar case like water? Presumably I’ve misunderstood what the author is after, but I have no idea what else might be meant here.p. 153. Here it looks as if “within things” and “inner nature” means just non-relational or perhaps intrinsic. These, however, are much weaker claims.