This manuscript aims to develop (or to extend) a philosophical account of perception that explicates the presumed presentational nature of perception via a kind of neo-Platonic sympathy. In accordance with the current effort to take into account multiple senses, it covers touch, hearing, and sight. It emphasizes an active dimension in perception, and calls upon various figures in the history of philosophy (Aristotle, Plotinus, Kilwardy, Olivi) and in the Continental tradition (Bergson, Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, Sartre) in developing and debating specific points. It also appeals to empirical work on perception here and there.
 
The topic and approach of the ms could potentially make for a valuable book. Some of the phenomenological observations are astute. The author offers explicit remarks about the value of historical engagement, but the quality of the historical scholarship is mixed. The appeal to the empirical literature is even more spotty. The argument (or exposition) is often difficult to follow. The organization seems clear enough in the chapter subheadings, but in practice has something of a stream of consciousness feel, especially in parts of the first four chapters. There is a fair amount of unneeded repetition: some repetition could be replaced by deeper explication. Finally, key concepts such as presentation and sympathy need to be explicated near the front of the work. (More than occurs now in the Preface for presentation.) The work needs to address, in the abstract and in concrete details, how the sympathetic aspects of perception fit with the causal role of sound waves, light, or tactile interaction with bodies. This point especially needs to be addressed for hearing and sight.
 
My primary suggestion would be that the author develop some of these ideas in journal articles and then take another shot at drafting a book.
Especially chs 1-4 need to be rethought in terms of exposition and clarity. One way to see this work is as a continuation of some themes, especially on presentation, transparency, and opacity, that were discussed in relation to Aristotle, Empedocles, and Plato in the author's recent book, now put in relation to some new concepts and figures. The new concepts include especially the notion of sympathy, but also a larger role for tactile metaphors/comparisons. The new figures include Plotinus, Kilwardy, and Olivi.
 
In general, the exposition and scholarship in chs 5-6 are stronger than in chs 1-4. I give a few specific instances below (which are illustrative and not exhaustive). Some general points: The historical voices arise almost by surprise in the first four chapters. The distinction between assimilating to the object of touch over time and representing the object of touch as a result of several samplings over time needs to be addressed more clearly. The discussion of the phenomenology of touch is valuable at points but needs to engage more of the philosophical literature, and to engage the literature it mentions (e.g., Smith's work) more fully. The discussion of touch among Gibsonian psychologists, as well as the discussion of hearing, would be a natural for the author's approach.
(Gibson's 1966 book might be the place to start.) The long discussion of sound in the medium as analyzed by various figures is of value, but has very much the feel of an early draft in terms of presentation for a reader. The discussion of Berkeley, in particular, is based on assertions that are not backed up by genuine engagement with Berkeley's writings. In general, the use of historical texts in the first four chapters should be fitted into a narrative structure of how ideas developed and how this illuminates the context for the author's favored positions (this need not be a dense structure, see below). The concept of attention arises esp. in chs 2, 3, 5, but does not get a sustained treatment, including a discussion of relations between perception and attention. Finally, the author uses citation to other works on various occasions to substitute for explaining a concept that is central to the present work. This kind of offloading by citation should not be used for key concepts and for points that will be discussed for several pages under the assumption that the reader knows the basics (w/o offering those basics up).
 
A greater role is billed for touch in the present work, though it is unclear that the performance takes place. The notion of grasping is much discussed in the first two chapters. The theme recurs in the chapters on hearing and sight, but not in a manner that clearly follows on from the haptic notion of grasping. Efforts are made in this direction, but could be made sharper, involving more uses of contrast with other known positions to show what is distinctive here. The haptic element in the vision chapters seems more like touching rather than grasping, despite the author's suggestions.
 
Perhaps the most valuable element in the present ms is the discussion of the phenomenology of extramission. These chapters have a much more sustained engagement with historical exegesis and discussion than do the first four chapters. This discussion could be broadened and deepened.
There are several mentions of Augustine in relation to the neo-Platonism of Kilwardy and Olivi, but no explication of relevant texts from Augustine where he speaks of the caring attention of the soul to the body, but without causal influence of the soul on the body. More generally, there has been a fair amount of new scholarship on the notion of activity in perception. It would seem that the author would benefit from studying that literature (and other recent literature on the history and philosophy of perception) and being able better to situate the works that are discussed, from Kilwardy and Olivi. Or the author might find that other works should also be discussed. The deepening might come from a fuller exposition of how 'presence' is supposed to work for vision at a distance via sympathy, and how it fits together with a causal interaction between surfaces (or other light-structuring processes), light, and eyes.
 
Particular points:
 
Preface: the notion of perception as presentation is frequently invoked but not really explicated. We learn that a kind of pure presentationalism will not be reducible to representation, or representational content. But we.re still not sure what the positive position is and how it works. Is this a matter of Hamiltonian direct presence of an external world item?
(In Hamilton, it is the retinal image.) Is it the naive realism of Cook Wilson, at least as regards spatial properties? What is the relation between presentation and representation in the author's favored position, and according to others?
 
There is some interesting discussion of how history might matter, but there is an undefended presumption that it is obvious that one should avoid being modern, e.g., about colour, where this means somehow rejecting relationalism about colour.
 
Introduction: I had expected that there might be an introduction where such conceptual points were taken up, and to frame the coming chapters, including some initial framing of the notions of presentation and sympathy, perhaps also the notion of sensory activity (including an acknowledgement of Gibson and enactivism) and the relation between attention and perception. Perhaps also a framework for the various historical figures who will be discussed, and why these and not other figures are coming to the fore. The framework need not be dense and detailed, but might include some notice that the present work is taking a sustainedly neo-Platonic approach and then say some things about the specific figures who are invoked.
 
page 3: 'As a matter of fact, Herring's [sic!] basic phenomenological claims about color vision had to wait for Hurvich and Jameson's research for empirical support'. Hering offered a great deal of empirical support for his position, as did some of his followers. His work was well represented in some literature, but esp. American psychology awaited H&J to boost Hering's opponent process theory into first place.
 
page 7 and elsewhere: Invocation of the notion of perceptual constancy w/o offering the reader an explication in this text (as opposed to an author/date citation of where to find out about constancy). Since the notion is discussed at some length, it should be explicated.
 
page 10: 'If a tangible quality's presentation in tactile experience is explained, in part, by that quality inhering in the object perceived, then the object must possess this quality prior to perception'. An intentionalist or representationalist might agree to this statement as worded. More needs to be done to show what is distinctive about the present 'presentationalist' position.
 
page 10: 'So far in our discussion of grasping or enclosure we have established at least one claim about the metaphysics of sensory presentation, that sensory presentation is of such a nature that its objects may be disclosed over time'. The sense in which this is a metaphysical point should be clarified. Also, the idea of temporal integration over time is longstanding in the history of the philosophy and psychology of sense perception. It underwent something of a revival in the twentieth century, with perhaps the Gestalt psychologists leading the way. But the point is found in Helmholtz, Berkeley, Descartes, and Ibn al-Haytham.
 
page 12: 'consider the claim that our ordinary experience of the natural environment that partly constitutes the Manifest Image of Nature is nothing more than a Grand Illusion'. The author pairs the 'grand illusion' hypothesis with the famous Sellarsian term 'manifest image'.
Sellars himself did not think of the manifest image as illusory or even, in the end, as incompatible with the scientific image. Both images can yield knowledge. So perhaps the author should just talk about the 'grand illusion' hypothesis here.
 
page 15: 'the qualitative character of my color experience depends upon and derives from the qualitative character of the color presented in that experience (for defense of this claim see Kalderon 2008, 2011a,c)'. Maybe the defense of the claim can be deferred to the cited works, but the author should explain the point sufficiently in this text for the reader to at least understand what is being asserted.
 
page 20: 'If something feels metallic, and this is a case of tactile perception, then not only is this because of its metallic feel, but something's feeling metallic is also constituted, in part, by that metallic feel. The metallic feel of the thing is felt in it and in conformity with it. That is just what it is for something to be present in tactile experience'. What does this mean? (Being told the position has been explained elsewhere doesn't do it.)
 
pages 35-8, in chs. 3, 5: the author discusses the notion of attention as brought forward by others in various passages. Some direct discussion is needed of how attention integrates with perception in the favored position in this work.
 
pages 71-2, Berkeley: 'That a sensory modality has a proper object does not preclude it from having other objects as well. Thus we can see motion and feel motion. Berkeley thus extends the Peripatetic account in claiming, in addition, that sounds are the sole objects of audition. We hear no other thing'. No citations to specific texts are given for these dubious or at least questionable claims. Re motion, it is a central point in Berkeley's NTV (and also in the Principles) that spatial properties in touch and vision are not comparable (visual shape, size, and motion: NTV, sec 137). Also, Berkeley may well hold that sound as a proper object is at no distance and is not as of a sounding thing, but he could well hold, similarly to the author's 'neo-Berkeleans', that sounding things are the mediate objects of hearing (NTV, secs 46-7). In general, Berkeley's own position and that of some named neo-Berkleans should be spelled out more fully, with citations.
 
page 123, Olivi quote: 'it absorbs the object intentionally to itself'.
The Latin word here translated as 'absorbs' is imbibere. This means literally to drink in, but by extension to conceive (mentally).
Since the notion that the sensitive or intellectual power absorbs the thing or its form is controversial, investigation should be made of this word usage and the translation should be defended.
 
pages 124-5: 'While it is difficult to form a clear, positive conception of terminative causes, the negative contrast with efficient causes is clear. The actualization of a perceptual power may require the presence of its object in the natural environment but that object acting upon the power is not required for its actualization'. It would be ok to beg off giving a positive account if this were a mere side point. But the notion of terminative cause is invoked again and again in subsequent pages. The author owes the reader a shot at clarifying the positive content of this notion.
 
page 156: 'Perception places us into the very heart of things and reveals their inner natures'. The author has made a case for our phenomenally being with the object of perception, or 'in it' spatially (as when we grasp a volume and feel the full volume from a particular tactile perspective). The notion of .inner nature. is illustrated mainly by sympathy in the sense of fellow-feeling. I'm not sure if the author wants a fully endorsed animism with respect to stones (though perhaps he does for trees).
 
 
Oxford University Press (UK) Disclaimer

This message is confidential. You should not copy it or disclose its contents to anyone. You may use and apply the information for the intended purpose only. OUP does not accept legal responsibility for the contents of this message. Any views or opinions presented are those of the author only and not of OUP. If this email has come to you in error, please delete it, along with any attachments. Please note that OUP may intercept incoming and outgoing email communications.